[Music]
good morning welcome to breakfast with
charlie state and
naga manchetti our headlines today new
rules for international passengers
arriving
in england and scotland from next week
they'll have to show a negative
coronavirus test result
the travel industry has been calling for
the tests for months but says it now
needs more detail about how the scheme
will work if you don't comply you'll
face a fine of 500 pounds
and about turn from president trump he
condemns the riots inside the u.s
congress
by his supporters as a heinous attack my
focus now turns to ensuring a smooth
orderly and seamless transition of power
this moment calls for healing and
reconciliation
tough new restrictions come into force
in northern ireland preventing people
from
leaving home without good reason in
wales the lockdown has been extended by
another three weeks
good morning coronavirus now hits the fa
cup one game is off and a significant
outbreak in aston villa means they're
planning to play their youngsters
against liverpool tonight
and another cold and wintry day icy
conditions right across the uk this
morning and for some
fair bit of snow as well i have all the
details here on breakfast
good morning it's friday the 8th of
january our top story this morning
people arriving in
england and scotland from abroad will
have to provide a negative covet 19 test
result from as early as
next week this morning on breakfast the
first minister of wales mark drakeford
confirmed that the welsh government will
adopt the policy
once cardiff airport resumes
international arrivals
it comes after months of pressure from
the airline
industry arrivals will have to take
tests
up to 72 hours before leaving the
country therein
it will apply to everyone whether
they're arriving by boat train or plane
there will be a small number of
exemptions including julia's
children under 11 or anyone traveling
within the uk
or ireland well our political
correspondent jonathan blake joins us
now from westminster
uh so quite a lot of questions around
this not least about practicalities but
also about the timing of bringing in
this measure now
yes charlie and some of those answered
but not all by the transport secretary
grant chaps who's been here on breakfast
in the last
hour or so and we'll hear a bit more of
what he had to say in a moment this has
been something that the government has
resisted
doing up until now arguing that
tests either at the border or before
people travel wouldn't really make that
much difference
given that the virus was already here
and in circulation
but it seems that the concern around a
particular
new variant of the virus discovered in
south africa
and the possibility of other new more
transmissible variants of coronavirus
has now forced ministers to act labour
say they've been calling for this for
months and have accused
the government of leaving the back door
open to
the uk but as you've been explaining as
of early next week
anyone arriving in england or scotland
will need to give proof of a negative
coronavirus test
taken up to 72 hours before
they travel to the uk and that'll apply
to passengers coming
via air via train or via boat and
grant shaps the transport secretary
explained a bit more about why the
government is
acting now what we're trying to do now
is stop a new variant which isn't
established here
from coming here and this is this south
african variant where
the scientists are very concerned about
the ability of the vaccine to
tackle the south african variant so
we've done this today and i noticed the
canadians that the prime minister justin
trudeau there
has done exactly the same thing as us
actually overnight
also introducing a 72-hour test but also
in addition to the quarantine measures
which remain in place
so the type of test that will be
eligible for this requirement there
isn't necessarily a specific
type but the transport secretary said it
would have to meet
uk requirements and that this doesn't
replace the need
for people to quarantine and isolate
once they arrive in the uk that remains
this is seen i think by the government
as an
extra precaution an extra layer of
protection
jonathan thank you president trump has
condemned his supporters who stormed
washington's capitol building yesterday
calling it
a heinous attack it's been confirmed
that a police officer who was injured in
the protest
has died bring the total number of
fatalities to
five now in a video posted to twitter
following a 12-hour ban from the site mr
trump called for reconciliation and
healing a different tone to his previous
messages our north america correspondent
peter bose has more
the cleanup continues in washington but
this is a mess that won't be brushed
under the carpet
the country has been shaken to the core
more violence at the heart of american
government
condemnation of the violence was slow to
come from one branch of government
the white house but more than 24 hours
after the capitol building was ransacked
donald trump's tone has changed in a new
video the president
condemns what he calls the heinous
attack saying he's outraged by the
violence
lawlessness and mayhem the demonstrators
who infiltrated the capital
have defiled the seat of american
democracy
to those who engage in the acts of
violence and destruction
you do not represent our country and to
those who broke the law
you will pay the president defends his
decision to challenge the election
results
but he doesn't repeat his unfounded
claims that the process
was rigged mr trump's comments will do
little to persuade his opponents
including some republicans that he's
still fit to hold office
leading democrats in congress have urged
mike pence and the cabinet
to invoke the 25th amendment and remove
him from the white house
the president's abuse of power his
incitement
of a mob against the duly elected
representative
body of the united states is a
manifestly impeachable offense if there
ever was an impeachable offense
what the president did was it
but the clock is ticking on donald
trump's presidency
he'll be out in 12 days when joe biden
takes over
mr trump has pledged that it will be a
smooth and orderly transition of power
but many americans are nervous about
what could happen
between now and then the tension in the
country
is palpable peter bose bbc news los
angeles
the national lockdown in wales has been
extended to a further
three weeks first minister mark
drakeford says schools will remain
closed to most
pupils until the february half term
unless the number of covet
19 cases decreases our world's
correspondent mark hutchins joins us now
from cardiff with the le with the latest
mark good to see you and we were talking
to the first minister
earlier as well lots of things to
discuss
yes and you didn't uh really need to be
nostradamus to predicted that the
welsh lockdown would continue for at
least another three weeks
and so it is just take a look at the
rather worrying hospital figures um i
think it is the elasticity if you like
of the
school school timetable that will have
the biggest impact on many people's
domestic lives around wells the decision
as you say has been
taken to extend the closure of schools
to
most pupils a decision confirmed a short
time ago by the first minister
it means bringing schools into line with
the rest of the
lockdown regime so schools in wales will
now
remain on remote learning until the 29th
of
january the end of the next three week
cycle at the earliest
we are looking at the workplace uh with
our trade union and other colleagues to
see if there are further safeguards that
we can put in place
to make sure that workplaces are safe
given the fact that the new variant is
so much
uh easier to catch than the previous
version of coronavirus
and we're looking at supermarkets and
other places where people
leave their homes and go to to make sure
that they are organized
in a way that keeps their staff and
their customers safe
and just to pick up on the subject of
schools it does look like
pupils won't be going back to school
until at least
after february half term and for gcse
and a level students it means the
assessments they were due to have in the
classroom
in the spring term they won't now uh be
happening so for all of us
uh we're still in lockdown it'll be
three weeks on sunday
since lockdown began i think i might
mark the occasion by uh staying in
[Laughter]
mark i think we'll all be staying in
with you just we'll all be there with
you in spirit
enjoy it let's focus around
on the situation in northern ireland
tougher restrictions have come into
force
today preventing people from leaving
their homes without good reason
under the new regulations people should
only be outside for limited activities
such as shopping for essentials
exercising or going to the doctor a
rising covered patients is also for some
hospitals to cancel
urgent operations the pressures facing
some ambulance services during the
pandemic are
off the scale this according to the
royal college of emergency medicine
the bbc has been told that last month in
the southeast of england
ambulance waiting times at hospitals
rose by 36
in december compared to the same month
in 2019 people are also having to wait
longer for ambulances to arrive
when they're called lack of access to
fast broadband during the pandemic is
increasing economic inequality between
the rich and poor that's according to a
report by a group of mps
the public accounts committee says a
litany of failures mean people who are
worse off and those in rural areas are
being left behind
the findings come as more people are
reliant on broadband to work and learn
from home
during lockdown the government said we
do not agree with this report which
contains a number of
[Music]
inaccuracies
see the headlines as they happen and
watch bbc news live in the app and get
the full story with bbc dot co dot uk
forward slash news follow the story for
all the latest with bbc news